Type: #WILT 


[[Current Account Deficits]]
[[Slaughterhouse Five]]
Emerging Markets and Path Dependencies


Transocean (RIG) is an American offshore oil rig contractor. After years of excess supply, rig contracting rates are increasing again. Higher oil prices and fewer available rigs are pushing up day-rates. RIG recently said they see the most opportunities for offshore drilling in Brazil. The state-run oil company (Petrobras) is increasing investment which will require more rigs. National oil companies (NOCs) like Petrobras have objectives different from private E&Ps. While the latter are just starting to increase capex, NOC's never stopped. It also speaks to another theme for Latin America. Most of the governments are now left leaning and campaigned against resource extraction. However, commodities are still an important part of their economy. Exports are necessary for their social spending plans. Oil (and commodities more generally) are also increasingly important in a multi-polar world.  

US shale had shifted power from the Middle East, Russia, Venezuela, and Iran to the US. Easy money allowed for record investments into shale assets. This propelled the US to became the world's largest oil producer. US shipments picked up the slack when Europe stopped imports from Russia. That shift is now reversing. The Bakken will produce much less oil, and the Permian is nearing or past its peak as well. Shale wells produce most of their oil in the first two years and need continuous drilling. This leads to negative cashflows and only worked during an era of ultra-loose money. After Covid, the market is not rewarding growth stories in the energy industry. It wants capital returned to shareholders. This reversal will be good for OPEC. It may also require the US to normalize relations with previous adversaries. 

Developing countries who are reliant on oil imports will be at the mercy of large producers. Kenya's oil needs have given it a large current account deficit. It now has the largest external financing needs in Sub-Saharan Africa. It has a small IMF program, but that won't be enough to cover its large external needs. Pakistan is another large oil importer. Unlike Kenya it's strategically important to many of its neighbors. It's received emergency funding from Saudi Arabia and China. It seems they would rather gain favour with other states than accumulate reserves. Exporters previously used their current account surpluses to build dollar reserves. This is what financed the US' trade and budget deficits. The US' tendency to weaponize the dollar may be changing this. If the US government can confiscate your dollar holdings (as they did with Russia), why accumulate them? Many states (especially China) have little need to continue building dollar reserves.

Countries like Pakistan and Kenya have few options for fixing their current accounts. In the short-term, they can cut energy imports by devaluing their currency. But since energy is inelastic, this results in higher inflation. Increasing exports requires major changes to the economy. They need to make the economy friendlier for investment (both domestic and foreign). They have to focus on exports rather than domestic consumption. They have to cut tariffs which encourage firms to produce for the domestic economy. They need to cut fiscal deficits to lower local borrowing costs. Business-frendly regulations like transparent insolvency laws are also important. None of these changes are easy to make quickly. 

**Path Dependencies**

I've been thinking about path dependencies and the future. I recently read Kurt Vonnegut's Slaughterhouse Five. In the book, the main character, Billy Pilgrim, claims that aliens - the Tralfamadorians - once kidnapped him. These aliens can see all things at once and have no sense of time. The Tralfamadorians don't believe in free will. While they can see the future, they have no ability to change it. Vonnegut was using the aliens' fatalism to highlight how we think about war. We act as if It's natural and unavoidable.

What do the Tralfamadorians have to do with markets? My first thought was that, like the aliens, we shouldn't see everything as causal. Sometimes things just happen. My other thought was regarding forecasts about the future. The aliens' claim to be able to see everything (past, present, and future) all at once seems absurd. The lack of causality between the present and the future seems wrong to us. It goes against our belief in free-will. However, we're guilty of ignoring causality when we make forecasts. We'll make a call about the future and downplay the path dependency. This becomes more of a risk the further out you forecast. For example, many are calling for a soft landing followed by double dip inflation. That could happen, but it's important to remember that the second phase won't be apparent for a long time. Forecasting a multi-step future like that requires ignoring causal links along the way. After a soft landing, how will people and firms change their behavior? If house prices and equity markets fall enough, that could push up labour force partipation. That in turn would lower wage growth and possible avoid another bout of inflation. It's unclear if a soft landing would be sufficient to change behaviors like that, but it's worth considering. We shouldn't be arrogant when attempting to forecast the future and perhaps should stick to one event at a time.

Maybe Vonnegut's intention was to humble us when we think about the future (as well as the past). His book is known as one of the great anti-war books of the 20th century. However, before we criticize the actions of people back then, we should think about why they did what they did. What mistakes were they making? What cognitive biases were they guilty of? And are we making some of the same mistakes today?