Type: #source 
References: [[Savings vs Investment]]
[[Japan, Germany, and the Challenge of Excess Savings]]
[[Trade Wars are Class Wars]]

The US' CA deficit can only partially be explained by the budget deficit. Germany and Japan have surpluses while running budget deficits. Part of it is due to global factors. That it’s equal to the savings deficit is a tautology. What’s unexplained though is what caused the savings deficit.

Part of the savings glut is from the developed world-- mainly Japan and Germany. But most of it is from the developing world. Many developing countries in East Asia and Latin America went through crises in the 70s and 80s and so they shifted their economies to build buffers of reserves. This required them to become current account surplus countries and increase private savings.

Some emerging markets also wanted to reduce the impact of capital flows (which led to previous crises and hurt their export markets) or they wanted to cut external debt. They hence sterilized flows by buying dollar debt and issuing local debt. This requires higher private savings and also implies a current account surplus. High oil prices also created current account surpluses for oil exporters (Russia and Venezuela for example). 

Developing countries can only increase their current account surpluses if developed countries accommodate that with current account deficits and lower savings. The attitude towards savings did not shift in the West. Demographic changes should have resulted in higher savings in the West. Instead, the shift in external positions occurred through asset prices and exchange rates. From 1996-2000, the shift was in equity prices. Capital flows into the US led to a surging stock market and a stronger dollar. The wealth effect of higher asset prices made consumers more willing to consume, including on imports. The stronger dollar further enabled imports and made exports less competitive. The rise in capital investments (facilitated through a stronger stock market and profit opportunities) occurred at the same time as people felt less of a need to save. The increase in household wealth and expectations of future income made consumers less conservative. Hence investment rose while savings fell, and this mirrored the change in the trade balance. 
  

After the tech bubble popped in 2000, investment opportunities around the world shrank, as did real interest rates. Lower real interest rates led to a housing boom in the US which replaced the equity boom of the late 1990s. The same process followed with higher household wealth (which was accessible through easy cash-out refinancings and 30 year mortgages) allowed Americans to keep savings low. US business investment also began to come back in the early 2000s, and together with a growing fiscal deficit, contributed to the current account deficit. The effects have been more pronounced in the US due to its reserve currency status and the willingness of foreigners to deposit savings into treasuries. However, there are similar current account deficits across the developed world, with the exceptions of Japan and Germany. One important factor is the wealth to income ratios, which have risen for countries that experienced large deficits. These countries all saw increases in household wealth, mostly related to housing; this did not occur in Japan or Germany.

There is hence a link between increases in household wealth and shifting to a current account deficit country. 
  

Per the arguments above, the US current account deficit is being driven by developing countries shifting to net lenders, running current account surpluses, and a few large developed countries maintaining high savings rates (Japan and Germany). While it's good that developing countries have stabilized their currencies and built up reserves, it's not desirable in the long-term, that many developing countries are net lenders to the developed world. Capital to labour ratios are already high in developed countries and there are few profitable investment opportunities remaining. This is why excess savings dumped into the developed world leads to asset bubbles. It would make more sense for capital to flow from developed countries to developing countries, where there are more investment opportunities and younger populations. That would require them to improve certain conditions for investment. 

Excess capital flowing into the US fuelled home construction and residential real estate in the early 2000s rather than business investment. Rising house values led to more consumption rather than investment. This will lead to rises in Debt/GDP, as the debt isn't funding profitable investments.     

There are also sectoral and distribution issues resulting from these inflows. Non-tradable goods like housing have done well at the expense of manufacturing and export-oriented industries. Bernanke doesn't say this, but this also has implications for rising inequality. 
  
Bernanke ends by advocating for financial liberalization in emerging markets. If they can return to markets and become net borrowers again, some of these impulses could be reversed. That's exactly what occurred in the last 20 years, but the US still have a very high current account deficit. This is mainly because of China. Indeed, most emerging markets that I track have current account deficits, with the notable exceptions of large oil producers. The policies of Germany (probably bolstered by the Eurozone), Japan, and China now account for most of the excess savings.