Type: #source 
Source:  Gavekal 2.23.23
References: [[WILT - 3.6.23]]
[[Dollar Hegemony]]

Since the Asian Financial Crisis, and their bailout by the IMF,. Asian economies have accumulated as many dollar reserves as possible. They subsidizied their export industries to generate large current account surpluses. The reserves of South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, and the Philippines went from 200bn to 1.3tr from 1998 to 2022. These countries (like almost all countries) transact with each other in USD. Since energy is denominated in USD, if oil prices spike, any one of these countries could have a liquidity crisis. That limits the attractiveness of their currencies for others to hold. As a result, they only accept USD for intra-regional trade. The excess savings were deposited into UST which lowered US yields, encouraged more borrowing by Americans, and led to further trade deficits. This also killed the US industrial base. 

Countries are moving closer to accepting other currencies for oil payment. Russia transacts with China in RMB, with India in UAE Dirhams and others. China is moving closer to a digital currencies that member central banks could settle in their own currency. If Asian countries didn't have to generate huge surpluses and deposit them into dollars, they could invest them locally. This will boost domestic infrastructure spending and will lead to higher productivity and real incomes. Long duration assets in the region will benefit (infrastructure, banks, health care) including local currency bonds yielding more than 10yr CGBs. HK and Singapore will steal some of NY's market share for international capital. Countries with big energy deficits but surpluses elsewhere (Turkey, India) will benefit. As will Latam and Africa which will get investment from Asian countries.

Europe is the biggest loser given its energy neads. If real rates return 3% (what it was before the Asian savings glut), that's higher than the growth of Europe's  weakest economies. They won't be able to finance their deficits and will be heading to a debt trap. Europe will have the highest labour costs, energy costs, immigration problem, weak defense, and tough regulatory environment. the US will be okay if real yields there on LT bonds remain below the rate of inflation (as they are now), leading to an inflationary boom. Europe will go through an inflationary bust, while Asia is moving to a deflationary boom. That's a big "if" for the US.