Reference:  [[Edge]]

After you've evaluated the competing hypotheses and found an asymmetric trade, the next step is to measure the convexity. A position is convex if it becomes a better trade as it moves in your direction. That is, if the underlying drivers move the way you expect them to, it becomes more sensitive to these drivers. As the drivers move away, it becomes less sensitive. This results in accelerating PnL if you're right. In general, you pay for convexity. Sometimes you can get paid to be exposed to convex upside. That's the best setup.

**Examples**
Credits that need access to markets are worse off when bonds are at 90 than when at par. Their higher cost of debt blocks them from markets. Hence shorting a high yield bond at par (who will have refi needs in the next 2 years) is a convex trade. It becomes a better short as it widens.   

A HY callable bond at par has less upside by definition but looks safer to many people. It looks like a carry trade, and so buyers think all they need is for nothing to change. It’s passive income. When the bond is at 90, buyers think they need credit improvement for it to tighten. So the bar to buy has actually increased even though there’s more upside. The flaw is thinking of carry as passive income. You earn carry in exchange for the convex downside.

So if nothing changed fundamentally, but a HY bond falls from par to 90, it goes from a credit that doesn’t have to do anything (carry) to one that needs to improve. It becomes a tougher buy at 90 than at par. When it’s par, buyers don’t think its story needs to change. Buying bond at 50 is like sitting in an empty restaurant. You think the food is good, but it’s uncomfortable because no one shares your opinion. A restaurant that’s 80% full and gets good reviews will fill up quicker than the empty restaurant getting the same reviews. There are real negatives to being in the empty restaurant. The staff may anticipate the restaurant closing and not try that hard. Owning the bond at 50 is convex if it's a better long at 60 or 70. It becomes easier to refinance and doesn't "look like" a default candidate. Rite Aid is a good example right now. You're also earning carry, and so you're being paid for convex upside.  