Type: #source 
References: [[UK - Outline]]
Source: Foreign Affairs March/April 2023
Author: Fintan O'Toole

The UK's constiuent nations - England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland - are drifting further apart. The UK was held together by its empire abroad (and the riches it brought local elitest), Protestantism, the unity of the labour classes across the nations, and pretige. The empire has obviously come to the end, with the Queen's death as a bookend of that period. UK residents are much less likely to identify as Christian (46%) compared to 2001 (72%). The protestants are no longer a majority in Northern Ireland either. Margaret Thatcher smashed the labour movement and destroyed that backbone of solidarity. The prestige of the British empire has faded with the Iraq war and most recently Brexit. Majorities in Scotland and Ireland voted to remain in the EU, breaking with the English. The EU gave the smaller nations in the UK the chance to connect with other states. The English, on the other hand, resented their culture being diluted with that of a greater European identiy. The develoved governments in Cardiff and Edinburgh were looked to during Johnson's horrible covid response.. A larger share in both states favour independence (Wales was incorporated in the 1200s). The UK has also relented with respect to Northern Ireland remaining in the EU common area. This showed how fragile London's control over Ireland is. 

The Labour party is likely to defeat Sunak in the next election. Starmer has endorsed a plan by former PM Gordon Brown (a Scot) to replace the House of Lords with a second chamber representing regions. This may be part of a move towards a federated state. The recession in the UK may push English conservatives to pick a fight with nationalists from Scotland and Ireland. Brexit has increased the willingess of the lesser states to leave the Union, but it's also made it harder. If the UK leaving the EU after 50 years was hard, imagine how difficult it would be for Scotland who's been in the UK for 300 years. 