By Lao She

Rickshaw Boy tells the story of Xiangzi (or the camel), an ordinary rickshaw driver in [[China]]. It gives a glimpse into the lives of the [[Chinese]] working class prior to the [[Communist]] revolution. It's a critique of individualism - no matter how hard the enterprising Xiangzi tries, he can't get ahead. When he saves up enough for a rickshaw, it's stolen by the military. He's forced to rent a rickshaw and pay the majority of the rent back to the owner. He eventually marries, but the marriage isn't really by choice and is unhappy. He and his wife lose their child. The book ends with him leading a funeral procession - the only work he could find by that age as he worked himself to the bone as a rickshaw driver his whole life - and looking forward to his own death. 

"Xiangzi took part in untold numbers of burial processions but could not predict when he would bury himself, when he would lay this degnerate, selfish, hapless product of a sick society, this miserable ghost of [[individualism.]]"

The symbolism isn't subtle, and the story is obviously an allegory for individualistic and materialistic societies such as our own.

The ending reminds me of a Hindi movie (Siddharth, 2013). It's about a poor man who earns a living fixing mens' zippers on the street. His son is sent to a distant city and is never heard back from again. The father looks for him but is never able to find him, and the movie ends with no resolution. There's one scene when he's speaking to kid living on the street and asking him if he knew his son. The kid said that he doesn't but maybe the man's son is luckier dead than alive - as he go released from this cruel world.