Type: #source 
References: [[South Korea Industrial Policy]] [[South Korea and Japan Agreement]] [[Japan - Outline]]

US global military expansion started with the Korean War. Kennan, who wanted containment, was overruled. The US wanted to take out Chinese territory after losing in the communist revolution. What the US didn’t get was that communism was making inroads in colonial states. Communism in China and Korea was based on hatred for Japanese. The North Koreans were the anti-Japanese freeeom fighters. S Rhee was a patriot and anti-Japanese as well but his team including the national police were all Japanese collaborators. 

The US allied national police killed many in the south. A future reconciliation committee revealed 500k deaths. Eventually the North got tired of the Japan collaborators killing Koreans. At first, the US policy was also a unified Korea. They abandoned this in 1947 when Marshall became Secretary of state and told Acheson to set up a separate South Korean government and tie it to the Japanese economy. Deng took the export led model from the  Koreans, after the Japanese started doing it as well. Americans originally didn’t think Westerners would buy Japanese goods and so the plan was to ship them to the rest of east Asia. 

Immediately after WW2, Japanese colonies in China and Korea were to be surrendered to those countries as reparations. That was abandoned 2 years later, and Americans intervened in Korea mainly to protect Japan and Taiwan. Austria was a model for what Germany and Korea could’ve been. They declared neutrality and the Soviets pulled their troops; Soviets thought Germany could do something similar. It was also a model for Korea though they never followed it. When US troops returned from Korea they went to Okinawa and so never really went home. U.S. troops in Japan and Germany are there to exercise veto control if they were to ever go against US policy. Japan chafed against this, but they never did anything about it. It's a brilliant policy as most Americans don’t event think about all of the US troops stationed globally. 

The reason North Korean forces were better than South Korean was they fought in the Chinese revolution. North Koreans got as far as Busan before Americans launched an amphibious attack from Incheon. They pushed the North Koreans to the Chinese border at Yalu River. The Chinese then intervened with North Koreans in China and captured Seol in 2 weeks. MacArthur then wanted to nuke China but he was fired by Truman. Over 4m Koreans died in the war. 

Le May, the Air Force general, committed war crimes when they bombed large dams to flood the fields and starve North Koreans. Bush accused North Korea of starting a second program which they were nowhere near, in conjunction with his preemptive policy. North Korea then left the NPT.