By: Upton Sinclair
Type: #source 
References: [[Rickshaw Boy]]
[[The Dean of Shandong]]
[[Plato]]
[[The Radetzky March]]
**Takeaways**

This is a book about the cruelty of American capitalism and how corrupt politicians work with businesses to rig the system. At times the book gets  repetitive. Jurgis would get a break or a streak of good luck only for it to fall apart. That’s the point of the book. Capitalism requires you to hope for these breaks. But you’ll never get out of the rat race. The system is rigged and when  Jurgis eventually gets  red pilled (Plato’s cave allegory) he understands how he never had a chance. He understands how trusts work and how they control the government. How individualism means being at the mercy of a cruel world. The meat packers were chosen because it’s the perfect metaphor for cruelty and the slaughtering of innocents. Jurgis was a hog too. The Book reminded me of [[rickshaw boy]] which was written at the same time. The difference is the protagonist there never became class conscious and died hopeless.

The descriptions of the union are interesting and remind me of my Dads recollections of working in a factory when he first immigrated to Canada. His conditions were much better, but he was also injured on the job and almost lost his finger. Dad talked about being a scab at times and how immigrants were willing to do work locals wouldn’t. The immigrant work ethic is a function of their desperation and their desire to prove others wrong. The protagonist talks about the people who told him not to trust America. My parents spoke about the people who doubted them as well. Workers’ rights were a foreign concept and aren’t as important as having money for food and shelter. The unions also prey on the poor and have their own brand of corruption. Dad also experienced militant student unions during his student days. It just occurred to me that this immigrant experience - poverty, and dealing with corrupt individuals preying on poor immigrants - may be part of why Dad loves the Godfather so much.  

There are many examples given of how expensive it is to poor in America. Going to the doctor, boarding private trains, even dying am needing a funeral. These are all compounded by corrupt officials and unregulated private services. It’s every man for himself. The protagonist eventually sees the value in joining a union. Non-financial implications of being poor area also given. They eat endless sausages but they’re made with potato flour which had no nutritional value. It’s illegal to use it in Europe but it gets shipped to the US. They’re also ignorant about nutrition especially given the food is foreign. This wasn’t something they worried about in the old country as they knew where food came from.

Ironically he was best fed in  prison and the work was the least taxing. He was with criminals, but their crimes paled in comparison with his employer, the home agent, and others in the outside world. This juxtaposition is clear. 

Ironically in a country that prides itself on family values, it was much easier for Jurgis to make it without a family. Free from all responsibilities, he was able to earn enough to support himself (for a while) . 

Eventually, he succumbs to his fate and becomes part of the problem. It’s easy to see how someone could resort to crime. It’s easy to see how the political machine is built and how it feeds off of people’s fear and ignorance. He knows it’s wrong but it’s nice not to be hungry all the time. He’s actually starts enjoying his life and doesn't need to drink everyday. He forgets about his old life. He begins to see how the world really works. When he’s arrested, his boss gets him bailed immediately. He’s no longer blacklisted at the packers.

There's a long description of strike breaking. The packers employ the poorest immigrants including African Americans. They get them from prisons from states that are eager to lose them. They bring them in by subsidized rail, all with police protection. The strikebreakers are unruly and disorganized compared to the union workers. After a strike is ended, with the agreement that union members wouldn’t be discriminated again, or promptly restarts after the packers refuse to hire union leaders. While Jurgis enjoys being a boss, he doesn’t feel quite right. He isn’t safe with the new workers and is still insecure. He is promised a position even post strike, but by now he knows not to trust anyone. Regardless it’s every man for himself now.




**Summary**
The books begins with a wedding. The main characters are Lithuanian immigrants, and the author details the traditions of a Lithuanian wedding. It’s clear that the guests are poor and most perform  manual labour related jobs.

The newly arrived immigrants are grateful for the work and for “freedom”. They can avoid conscription and corruption. The enterprising nature of Americans and the ability to create employment for thousands is juxtaposed against unsanitary and degrading conditions for the workers.

The family learns about home ownership and decides that it’s a better deal than renting. They have to trust others as they can’t understand the legal contract and are sure they’re being duped. A couple of lawyers certify that the contract is legit, but they probably don’t realize that if they miss a payment they could lose the house plus all of the money they put into it. The contract is legitimate but is still not a good deal for them. The scandal is that it’s legal.  

The logic of buying a house and saving every penny also reminded me of my parents’ experience. 
As the old neighbor confirmed, the house was indeed a scam. They’re old and poorly built. When buyers miss a single payment, as a many will, the home is seized and resold. They also forgot about the interest. The neighbor also told the family how the meat packers brings in new groups of immigrants every few years to repress wages and unions. First the Germans, then Irish, poles, Lithuanians, and Slovaks. Some groups, like the Irish, formed gangs and were able to extract graft from the poor immigrants. Like Don Fuci from godfather 2. The hyper capitalism of the frontier West drives this process. They even falsify documents for their son so that he can work. The age restriction makes no sense to them anyways given they have no other way to support themselves. 

The unions inspire him to learn English and to read. This in turn gets him interested in politics and democracy. He learns the system is run by two gangs - political parties - who take turns with the graft. The local democratic boss controls the “machine” and is more powerful than the mayor. Corruption is rampant in the industry and the meat inspectors are only ensuring the meat is sold in the state. They aren’t looking after the public. The few inspectors who pointed out health violations were fired.

The protagonist gets injured on the job and can no longer contribute. Of course there’s no healthcare provisions and the company isn’t responsible. Meanwhile new waves of immigrants keep labor prices low and the meat packets band together to keep costs low and prices high.  He knows he shouldn’t sell his vote to the grafters but what difference does it make. There’s a run on a bank sparked by a nearby crowd who stops to watch a man get arrested - there wasn’t any issue with the bank.  

Jurgis isn’t able to get his job back and is forced to work in a fertilizer plant - the worst of all jobs. The phosphate seeps into his skin and slowly poisons him. He started drinking and is becoming an alcoholic. His wife is forced into a sexual relationship with her boss. Jurgis attacks the boss and is arrested. Everyday brings more desperation.

He’s in jail and is a broken man. It’s Christmas and he’s worried about his family. His wife will surely be fired. They’ll lose their home. The police are violent and corrupt. He misses the old country and is utterly helpless. He met a man in prison who was educated and said he may be able to help him in the future. He was eventually sentenced to 30 days. 

His wife does in child birth as does the child. He’s really hit rock bottom. He had to beg a midwife to help and owes her money as well. He was also blacklisted  by the meat packers and can’t get a job there. He eventually finds a job with a harvester. Life is extremely unfair. He’s also started drinking which puts additional strain on the family. Now that he lost his wife he’s only living for his son.

Just when you think things are getting better for Jurgis, he loses his son. He has no reason to go live now and I thought he’d attempt suicide. Instead, he decided to wander the country aimlessly without a worry. He had nothing to live for and no more responsibilities. He would work for food day by day and not care about the next. He actually seemed to be enjoying himself, as he’s repressed his immense sadness from losing his son. He is a family man though, and so I don’t think this will last. His guilt will return and seemed to when he met the Russian family. This episode also reveals how capitalism didn’t balance labour properly as farmers couldn’t find help in the country but there’s a surplus of workers in the city. It shows that there are alternatives to the city squalor. However, as one farmer revealed, there’s only work until the winter. 

He returns to Chicago and finds work only to repeat the same cycle. His unsafe working conditions lead to an injury, unemployment, and destitution. He meets an eccentric, and drunk, trust fund kid who invites Jurgis for a luxurious lunch. The butler kicks him out as soon as he can. Not sure what the point of this meeting was, except to contrast the rich and the poor, or if the kid will reappear.

Jurgis ends up back in jail after his $100 is stolen. There he meets jack Duane again and decides to work with him. He starts with petty crime and eventually starts working with the corrupt politicians who really run the city. He gets a job at a plant in order to influence union members and help his political boss. He doesn’t realize that his boss was responsible for most of the misfortunes in his life. He invested in the company that sold him his house, was responsible for the unpaved roads where he lost his son. When there’s a strike his boss tells him to go work as a scab which he eventually agrees to do.

The author makes a lot of racist remarks about the Black peoples brought in as strikebreakers. I’m not sure if the narrator is just playing the part. The strike days are filled with violence and debauchery. Jurgis is enjoying his position of power and it goes to his head. He steals and cheats. He attacks the man who insulted his wife again and gets arrested. He loses everything again and ends up homeless. Per chance he meets Marja who’s now a prostitute. She’s still the most sensible and tells Jurgis how wrong he was the pick that fight all those years back. He feels bad because of what she has to do, but he understands. He ends up at a communist party meeting. A stirring speech is made which entrances Jurgis.

Jurgis is now class conscious. He’s fallen in love with the idea of socialism. He’s excited for the future and has hope again. He’s realized that it’ll take time to convert people but he has something to live for. He doesn’t hate himself like when he was a strikebreaker and has achieved some stability. He still needed luck though as in getting the porter job.

The book ends with various speakers describing a utopian socialist society. Sinclair wrote the book in 1906, before the Russian revolution and WW1. Many of his ideas around socialism remain end- goals today. Benefiting from technology and being able to work for only a few hours a day and then enjoy the fruits of your labour are still the ultimate goal of communism. The need to establish it globally so that it isn’t overturned by other capitalist societies is still discussed [[The Dean of Shandong]]. The ability to transition seamlessly to a society of cooperatives is not elaborated on or explained. One thing the book shows is how hard the poor work. Surely they should be able to live off that? The book had a major influence on America. Not for mainstreaming socialism but for shedding light on the meat packing industry. Sinclair famously said he aimed at peoples hearts and hit their stomach instead.