Author: Stefan Zweig
Type: #source 
References: [[Radzetsky March]]

**Exec Summary**
Zweig captured Austria, and especially Vienna, at the turn of the twentieth century. He describes the Viennese as innocent, naive, and indulgent. They thought they had progressed past the point of conflict. They were obsessed with the arts-- especially theatre, and were oblivious about politics, even in neighboring Germany. They took their liberal nature for granted, and thought the age of conflicts was behind them. It reminded me of how some Western leaders (Fukuyama, most famously), described the late 1990's. We had reached the end of history, and nothing could stop the trajectory towards Western style democracy. 


The book is written in the middle of WW2, and the author is angry with how everyone has lots their humanity and rationality. The first chapter is about how the age of security is now past them. What struck me is how this could have been written today. His discussion of how everyone thought conflict was behind us and progress was inevitable is similar to Fukuyama’s End of History which is now widely mocked. Poverty was going down, governments were representative, and wars were a thing of the past. There were systems in place and people had faith that they would last forever. Even when the emperor dies, the next one would be the same. It’s a good lesson for the future. He references Freud who apparently said todays calm is just a veneer. Vienna is the center of his story and is representative of pre-war culture and liberalism. He references Icarus, and it’s clear he recognizes his own hubris in thinking things wouldn’t change. I’m reading this simultaneously with the Radzetzy March. In that book, the predictability of the Hapsburg empire is on display, as is its hubris.  

In the foreword, he explains that he’s writing the book in exile and without any of his notes or books. He might as well be writing from prison. The biggest ambition of Jews in this region at this time was to be an intellectual. Even more than money. His parents both came from wealthy families especially his mother. He tried to live humbly like his father and avoided most indulgences. The first love of Viennese was culture and theatre not politics or foreign affairs.

The Viennese were fanatical about the theatre. This was true even for the lower classes and people who had never been to the great theatres. Actors were the highest celebrities and even their entourages were famous. The Viennese were more interested in art and culture (especially theatre) than politics or statecraft and were very different from imperial Germany at the time. It reminds me of the Bengali’s versus Punjabi who dominated west Pakistan or the South Indians versus the north.

The Jewish bourgeoisie were the most important patrons of the arts and were hence a core part of Vienna. The royalty were no longer supporters (as in the days of Maria Theresa) and wealthy Jews took their place. He’s describing Vienna as the height of culture to juxtapose it with what it became. He saw Vienna as the center of Europe and the anthesis of nationalism which he clearly abhors. I understand now how Austria stayed out of the German empire. It will be interesting to see how Vienna was transformed into (as he puts it) a provincial city in the German empire. It seems obvious now how antisemitism was part of this transformation. The Jews were global citizens almost be definition.

Germans, with their efficiency and ambition, looked down on Austria for its lackadaisical attitude. Life and let live was the attitude. The Viennese enjoyed their lives and were never in a rush. There was a dark side to this though. They were oblivious to the wars and intrigue on their periphery. Even the Balkan wars hardly made a dent on their lives. They took their security for granted. I don’t think the author's sentiment was shared with other ethnicities, particularly the Slavic people. The pre-war generation lived in ignorant bliss and experienced very little change. A stark contrast to the next.

The school system was industrial and assembly line like. Individuality wasn’t emphasized and teachers were authority figures who you weren’t to argue with. The author links the educational system with the obsession with security touched on previously. You were taught to respect that status quo and not question authority. Young people were rebellious and thirsty for change and so were contained by the school system. I see parallels with the current public school system in North America. You definitely aren’t taught to question authority.   

I’m assuming the author was an outlier in his intellectual pursuits. It would be surprising if all kids were obsessed with learning, but maybe that truly was the Viennese way. The students were particularly entranced by young talent. Those who attained literary greatness at a young age. The author and his friends were obsessed with the literary arts and were intellectually ahead of most. He emphasizes that there was nothing special about his school and this was true of all the middle and upper classes. There was something special in the city at the time. Calmness and the lack of political intrigue allowed focus on aesthetics. Suffrage only extended to the landed and those who paid a certain amount of taxes. The politicians though were convinced that they represented all of the people. As mass movements, starting with socialism spread, it became clear that there was an underbelly to the calmness. The art and literature that they were obsessed with as kids was homogeneous and in hindsight, seems gratuitous and frivolous. They were totally unaware of the fragility of the empire and conditions of the people on the periphery. The rigor of the humanist approach deserves praise, but who was it serving? Just the wealthy bourgeoisie class.

The socialists marched peacefully to the surprise of many. The Christian socialists capitalized on the lower middle class whose craftworks became unprofitable with the advent of machinery. Karl Leuger who became mayor focused on their anxiety and fear of falling into the working class. He also uses antisemitism to divert anger from the rich landowners.

The national socialists also arose at this time from Bohemia. They were Protestant which angered the clergy in Vienna. They were the first to use violence to intimidate a much larger, but passive, population. The wealthy like the author were too focused on the arts and passive pleasures to notice. This is after the Victorian era in which all sexual matters were completely hidden. Now things can happen but you can’t talk about them. Popular literature also repressed any talk of sexual maturity. There was a lot of hypocrisy around prostitution and morality. The nobility and court had access to high end prostitutes and were left alone by the police. Working class prostitutes needed special licenses and were constantly harassed. The lower classes were much more relaxed about sexual morality than the bourgeoisie.

Students in Germany enjoyed special status. This originated in the Middle Ages with the academic guilds but continued to the authors present day. They couldn’t be charged ordinarily and could participate in duels. Scars from previous duels was a badge of honor and helped you fit in with fraternities. More links with the [[Radzetsky March]].

The author’s writing was accepted into the feuilleton section of a prestigious magazine edited by Theodore Herzel, the father of Zionism. 

When he originally proposed the Israeli state, Herzel was shunned by the bourgeoisie Jewish community who was trying assimilate into Austria. They wanted to appear German and didn’t speak Hebrew. Zionism originally found favour with the working class in Eastern Europe and Russia who were still facing widespread discrimination. Wealthy Jews thought he was giving ammunition to their enemies saying Jews belonged in their homeland, which the author calls Palestine. Herzel argued that Jewish assimilation would be impossible. He was influenced by the Dreyfus affair, though Wikipedia says this wasn’t true. Zweig wasn’t a fan of the Zionist movement because of the people in it. He didn’t discuss the actual movement, but thought the supporters were hostile towards Herzel. 

He travelled to Berlin to escape Vienna's predictability. With the rise of German industrialism, many rich families moved to Berlin and arts followed. It lacked Vienna's traditions and so an artist could prove himself sooner. It was a bohemian society and he met people outside of his circle. He contrasts Prussians from Austrians. The former were efficient and economical. Austrians weren’t as organized but much more generous.

In Berlin he lived the bohemian lifestyle and was exposed to new people and diversity. He realized how little he actually knew, and rather than being inspired, he became downtrodden. He decided he had much more to learn and started translating the works others. He cited this as a good way to mater expression and to really understand a subject. Much like putting a complex argument in your own words. After he completes his PhD, he’s free to think as he pleases. He’s always striving for freedom of thought and chafed against the rigid school system. That’s an ongoing motif and will be challenged by the rise of the Nazis. He was especially depressed about the Nazis occupying Paris for this reason. He saw Paris as a place where you were free to think independently. Everyone in Europe was worse off post WW1. Their innocence was gone.

Paris, pre ww1, was accepting of everyone without no class differentiation especially in the Latin quarter. Berlin by comparison was very class conscious. His description of egalitarian Paris is in stark contrast to the popular imagination of Paris as being snobby.

His fondest memories are those with a group of poets who became his friends. What sets them apart his their devotion to artistic perfection. This is very foreign to me. Earning a living by writing, and not popular fiction or journalism, but high brow and esoteric literature. An obsession with understanding art and expressing complex thoughts and feelings that the art aroused. The whole thing seems gratuitous, and I think that’s the point. Around them, the world was changing. He mentioned an acquaintance who was a close friend but hated his writing because it didn’t concern anything real. To be a bourgeoisie Austrian during this period really insulated you from everything. I don’t know what would be the modern equivalent of this.

His description of Rodin, the sculptor working, is known as flow in modern contexts. He’s outside of himself, working quickly and instinctively. He forgot Zweig was still in the room as he fell into his work. He’s obsessed with perfection but isn’t trying too hard. It comes naturally in this state. It’s the final stage in knowledge - 1) don’t know what you don’t know, 2) know what you don’t 3) know what you know 4) don’t know what you know.  

His description of London is in contrast with Paris. Half way in culture between Europe and North America. There’s no place for a wandering artist. He realized that he needed a job to fully understand the country and London. He couldn’t get by just by observing as he did in the rest of Europe.

He started writing poems, then novellas, and finally plays. In his head this was the warmup up to full novels. I can see now the appeal of being a playwright. Taking a unique story and have it come to life. I could see Arjun as a playwright. I will encourage him to keep telling stories, as crazy as they might seem. Telling a story in a new way, say with the villain acting like a hero, doesn’t just demonstrate creativity. It also allows the writer to push himself to understand the character. It forces him to really understand a story. I can also see how someone could become a playwright or a screenwriter if given the right encouragement as a kid.

His plays all ended in failure when the leads died. He took this as fate— he wasn’t meant to be a dramatist, though they were clearly coincidences. This happens in our youth he observes, we see our lives as preordained and get angry when we fall off our desired path. In reality, there are always a multitude of paths. We end up where we need to be. Aurelius discusses this many times in [[Meditations]].

His travel to the US is an extension of the UK trip. There was nothing cultural for him to do. Being unemployed simply wasn’t an option in New York - not just to survive - but to even understand it. The US was defined by work and businesses, unlike leisure filled continental Europe. His anecdote about how he travelled there with no passport and could work without any questions being asked shows how desperate the country was for people willing to do work. If you wanted to work you could. It’s interesting that he also saw the last of the land separating the oceans before the Panama Canal was built. It signifies the role the US would play on the coming century. And it contrasts with Austrians busy with literature and aesthetics. He didn’t recognize any racial animus in the us and said all were welcome. He was an educated white European though and he clearly had blinders on.

His trip to India wa also interesting. It was the first time he saw poverty and racial discrimination. It foreshadowed to him the coming conflicts with colonialism and Europe’s inevitable fall from grace. He’s unique in that although he’s part of the bourgeoisie and obviously obsessed with the arts, he isn’t oblivious to politics. Well he is, but he was insightful enough to recognizes coming change. The Nazis and the theories around racial purity would be the culmination of this though not the end.  

He discusses Lebbembraum - meaning living space. This was the argument for a greater Germany and the justification for annexations. The nazis appropriated this sterile and esoteric geopolitical term for their aims.   

His discussion of the optimism of this time could be mistaken for the late 90s. The end of history and the triumph of liberal democracy. Technological advancements, cheap travel, globalization, the ability of even the middle class to see the world. Complete innocence and obliviousness. He observed that the tension was created by strength and arrogance that was built up during peacetime. The same could be said for the period after the Berlin Wall fell and the first gulf war. A Roman moment as someone observed when queen Victoria travelled a century and a half previously. The optimism was about to be shattered. This jives with other theories around low volatility environments. Such periods beget more and more risk taking and create fragility. Minsky observed this as well. Periods like this create more volatility for the future as pent up and suppressed volatility explodes. What’s key is all of the signs that are ignores. There was plenty of violence but it was in the provinces and the Balkans. No one cares about the suffering of these people. It wasn’t ever calm it was just swept under the rug. The latest incident in Israel highlights the same. Some people act as if the terrorist act was preceded by a period of calm and normalcy, a cease fire as some call it. That’s true if you completely ignore the violence felt by the Palestinians. It was the suppressed violence (by the Palestinian authority and others) that led to nonsense like the Abrams accords which were premised on the idea of peace without dealing with the Palestinians.

During the author's period, the preceding 40 years had been peaceful and made European powers arrogant and greedy. Colonial expansionism continued and they coveted each others land. He references a French author - rollard and his books Jean Christopher.   

Next chapter - start of ww1

It was an unusually calm summer. The archduke’s assassination didn’t elicit much sympathy as he wasn’t well liked. Some were relieved that the next in line would be king instead. The Hapsburg didn’t want the archduke's wife to be buried with them.

He was shocked that Germany would invade Belgium in violation of international treaties. People forgot about war. The last one was with the Prussians and was short. The Prussians were now Allies. People had faith in their own governments and were willing to serve. By WW2, people were much more cynical and didn’t trust their governments.

As the war began, people who were previously objective and reasonable became nationalistic. Cultural icons from opposing nations were blacklisted (Mozart music banned in France). Those who opposed nationalism like the author were called traitors. Ordinary people understood the horrors of war and even emphasized with opposing soldiers.

As there war dragged in, it became easier to oppose it. It was still unthinkable in Germany to admit the possibility of defeat. Emperor Karl of Austria attempted to make peace with the French, but was blocked by the Germans. He took refuge in Switzerland, which had become home to Europeans who opposed the war. The war tore Europe apart, and the more cosmopolitan (and European) you were (for example mixed marriages), the more you were hurt. He met James Joyce there, among others. The place also became the center of espionage.

The Alsatians for example were pushed to pick sides. As the war came to an end, many believed Europe had moved past this period, and rejoiced with Wilson’s 14 points. The Russian revolution was still in its honeymoon period. He mentioned Demain - an anti war journal at the time. 

He returned to Austria after it and Germany were defeated. The Hapsburgs were forced to flee and the country was in shambles. There wasn’t food or coal. The empire broke apart - the Czechs, Poles, Slovenians, and Italians had left the empire. The country’s industrial base was gone. The new republics formed their own currencies and the Austrian rump was forced to absorb all of the old crowns, leading to hyperinflation. The economy was destroyed and no one knew the value of money. There was rent control though.

Austria wanted to either reunite with its former territories or with Germany. The new states wanted to be free and the Ally's wouldn’t allow it to merge w Germany.

His description of post WW1 Austria and Germany is very interesting. When he returned to Austria from Switzerland, it was known you had to bring food and clothing as you couldn’t get it there. You had to prepare for a cold winter as they had no gold. Hyperinflation was destroying the economy. Even more illuminating was the description of how young people rejected all tradition. It puts Babylon Berlin into context. As opposed to his own youth when children respected their elders and beloved in institutions, no one trusted any authority now. All traditions - gender, sexual, artistic, etc were thrown out. It gave rise to rebellion, sexual experimentation, new art forms, and experimental literature. Proper grammar was discarded. Only activist politics - extremes of communism and fascism - were allowed. You see milder forms of this when countries elect protest candidates.

Hyperinflation sped up after assassination of rathenthau. Stinnes, the industrialist: capitalized by buying stakes of companies. There was a period of calm post the hyperinflation. People were eager to travel again and engage. His description of Russia at the time was interesting. Everyone had a view. He describes peasants visiting the hermitage and attempting to appear educated and cultured. The people were excited to take their country back. Cabbies had books even if they couldn’t read. I wonder if that’s what spurred the modern intellectual tradition there. They gave a lot of the credit to the revolution leaders for bringing new technologies when in fact they had just never seen them before. The people were enthusiastic and welcoming.

He had a strange story about Mussolini in Italy. He managed to get an author, who was being persecuted by the government, out of a lengthy prison sentence by writing to Mussolini. The author doesn’t explain when he became famous, but all of a sudden he has a lot of influence. His lack of discussion of his personal family is also odd. He’s once again enjoying the peace and calm, this time as a member of the establishment, before crisis is about to break.

It was clear from the beginning that Hitler was being financed by Industry. They saw his as a savior from communism and had been supporting him. At first, because Germans were so ordered and focused, many assumed Hitler would be confined to beer halls. Most people assumed that good senses would prevent anything close to Nazi Germany from happening. Austria thought it was insulated. It’s clerical/catholic background was against Hitlers Christian’s who elevated him above god. National socialism crept into the mainstream. They never let their full goals be known upfront. They tested one idea with the public and then moved to the next. Book burning didn’t become policy until it was mainstream. 

Strauss was Germany's greatest composer at the time. He sided with Hitler for strategic reasons. Eventually all non-Aryans were banned from the theater. People started keeping their distance from him because he was Jewish. London was a refuge for him as it was free of continental European politics (for now). Austria (under dolfuss) sought protection from Germany and so came under the protection of Italy. He himself was later assassinated. Mussolini demanded in exchange the end of Austrian democracy and the social democrat party. There were regular skirmishes between the social democrats and the national socialists at this time. This happened quietly and many Austrians didn’t realize what was happening. The author left after his home was illegally searched by the police.

He laments how the British began to see Hitler's point and thought he only wanted to unite the German people and then revisit Bolshevism. They didn’t see his broader ambitions. Austria was the keystone as he put it. Vienna had seen Hitler at his low point and he would enact his revenge now. What low point ? Hitlers ambition there was fueled by resentment. He thought the failure to implement the League of Nations but grant small countries' independence was a mistake as it put them at the mercy of the larger ones. He now feared that Britain would sacrifice Austria to Germany for peace. Anchluss was more important than I thought.

The Nazis soon annexed Austria and they enacted Aryan laws. Many were unnecessarily cruel, for instance banning Jews from public benches or from cohabitation with non-Jews under a certain age. Hitler was rejected from Vienna when he was young and poor and he was getting his revenge on the ornate and carefree city. The author remarked how even just before the annexation, Austrians were carefree and certain that they would be spared. There’s parallels to the east-west Pakistan war here. One group was martial, the other was artsy and cultural.

The author was made stateless as he left Austria and lost his passport. He was able to travel abroad with no papers before 1914. Now, the ultimate insult to a global citizen, he had to ask permission to travel. And not just visas like everyone else, he didn’t have a real passport and so needed special consideration. He once thought he wanted to be stateless i.e. cosmopolitan. He now realized the importance of having a home. That world has also changed since 1914. A world of borders was the ultimate insult for a traveling artist who enjoyed unfettered access to the greatest museums and thinkers. I’m also struck by how he still didn’t understand how the rest of the world lived back in those golden days. Much of humanity couldn’t imagine world travel and was subject to brutal colonization.

He’s struck by how much the world has fallen from his youth. They dreamed of a global world and liberalism. More time for leisure and the end of state backed violence. What occurred post annexation was shocking to him. He was in London when chamberlain made his deal with Hitler. The British people were tired of war and this was clear with the deal with Hitler. When chamberlain negotiated in Munich, he did so in weakness. The author was hoping for a negotiation given what he saw in Vienna. But instead there was capitulation.

There was a brief period (days it seems) post the Munich conference when the people were genuinely happy for achieving peace in their time. Even the author acknowledges that he was happy, partially because the whole country was relieved. They were almost euphoric - the French considered erecting a statue of chamberlain. The few Austrians in the city felt differently. The British just assumed that they had made a gentleman’s agreement that hitler would abide with.  

He, with princess Maria Bonaparte, managed to get Freud out from Vienna. He was a supporter of Freud who the medical establishment had banished. His dream analysis challenged the orthodoxy. He makes a strong case for a Jewish homeland here, though he doesn’t discuss displacing anyone else here. Jews had been steadily dehumanized by the Nazis and were banned from a public life. Jewish people of all economic classes and from all around Europe United as one people for the first time in a long way. Prosperous families had to beg for a visa to go somewhere. He cites one man looking for a visa for Haiti to take his family.

Freud was happy to be proven right about Hitler but wasn’t surprised either. He argued that culture couldn’t outstrip man’s base emotions. War broke out between Germany and Britain. He once again became an alien due to his German heritage. The British people were clueless to the war up to this point.

