Type: #source 
Author: Antonio Molina
Tags: #escape #conspiracy #cold_war

Like a fading shadow gives an account of James Earl Ray on the run in Portugal. It contrasts the lies and stories told by Ray while on the run with the author’s own writing process. Like Ray, the author sought refuge in Lisbon while completing one of his earlier novels. He was escaping from his mundane job and family life to the fantasy that was his novel. He talks about those days regretfully— how he left his newborn son and wife to go to Lisbon, and how he spent many nights drinking and doing drugs with friends. In the end, his novel was a success and he returned to his family. Ray’s escape was not successful as he was eventually captured and extradited to the US. The novel was strange and unique; 

I think the central point was that to write a novel one has to truly escape from his life - almost like a fugitive on the run. There were other similarities between the stories. Ray chose Lisbon as he could get a visa to Angola or Rhodesia, which were at the time colonial states premised on white supremacy. The author’s day job was in the office of tourism, and related to the foreign office where visas would be granted. These points seemed minor and unrelated to the story. My takeaway is simply that the best authors are able to completely detach from their lives and imagine and live something totally different. Ray, subsequent to his arrest, told a story about a man named Raoul who was supposedly the real killer. Was this just another story, or another example of Ray attempting to escape?

Summary:

James earl ray grew up very poor, and his mother died of liver cirrhosis. He sought refuge in Rhodesia (newly created) or Angola after fleeing the us. Rhodesia was a target for white mercenaries from the US.

The book mixes discussions about the author’s writing process and experience living in Lisbon with Ray’s story. I’m not quite sure what the connection is just yet. He first lives in Lisbon when he was much younger and describes how he was trying to be a writer with a young family and a boring day job. He was living a series of lies (I guess, much like Ray), in that he had no interest in his day job and was frequently apart from his wife and son, forcing him to live a bachelor life five days a week. Ray was also apart from his personal network and was obviously living a series of lies - using a forged identity, running from the authorities etc. it’s an interesting approach to draw parallels between your own life and that of a convicted killer. Maybe it’s alluding to the fact that’s there’s more to people than we can tell from the outside. The author was a gifted writer, but no one knew that. Ray was on the run (and some allege, including MLKs family, that he’s part of a conspiracy and wasn’t the actual killer).

There are many parallels between their stories. Ray needs to make up a fictional persona with a backstory and fake names. The author needs to come up with a story and character names. They’re both running away - Ray from the authorities searching for him, and himself from his young family. Neither had travelled much before. The flights to Toronto, and then London and Lisbon were the first for Ray. The author had never left Spain before. They both picked Lisbon bc of fantasies they projected on it. Ray saw it as an entry to white nationalist states in Africa, and the author simply thought the city would be an interesting setting - though he hadn’t been there before. A author emphasizes the role of smoking, drinking, and drugs in the writing process. He writes how authors believed then that to be healthy was to give in to convention - family life, 9-5, corporate etc. no obvious connection w Ray except that they’re both outsiders fighting against conventions.

When the author returns from Lisbon he isn’t happy to see his family. He goes out drinking w his childhood friends. He’s angry that he has to come back to a life of obligations. He wasn’t in Lisbon to work on a novel but rather to escape from his own life - which are kind of the same thing for him. Much like how Ray was running away from his life.

Parallels between the racism that drove Ray and that of Portugal maintaining African colonies. The visa administrator told Ray that Portugal only had overseas provinces not colonies and that they had no need for mercenaries. Think the authors Job is connected to the tourism bureau and so has a connection with the official granting visas. The bureaucrats (like the author) are described as smug individuals oblivious to how much control they have over others lives. This applies to the author as well.

After Ray is arrested he claims innocence and days he was set up by a man named Raoul. In great detail he describes how Raoul got him involved in a Mexican gun running operation. While the author and Ray both ran to Lisbon to escape, only the author eventually returns. Ray’s story about Raoul actually makes more sense to me.

